docs: add feature flags in SvelteKit apps with Neon Postgres (#1724)
neondatabase/website: content/guides/feature-flags-sveltekit.md

---
title: Add feature flags in SvelteKit apps with Neon Postgres

> subtitle: Step-by-step guide to integrating feature flags in SvelteKit apps with Postgres

Reviewer: ```suggestion
subtitle: A step-by-step guide to integrating feature flags in SvelteKit apps with Postgres
```

author: rishi-raj-jain
enableTableOfContents: true
createdAt: '2024-05-24T13:24:36.612Z'
updatedOn: '2024-05-24T13:24:36.612Z'
---

> This guide covers the step-by-step process of integrating feature flags in SvelteKit apps with Postgres (powered by Neon). Feature flags provide a way to control the behavior of your application without deploying new code, allowing you to test and roll out new features dynamically. Upon completing the guide, you would have an understanding of managing and rolling out of new features (such as a hypothetical faster payment method) using dynamic feature flags integration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This guide covers the step-by-step process of integrating feature flags in SvelteKit apps with Postgres (powered by Neon). Feature flags provide a way to control the behavior of your application without deploying new code, allowing you to test and roll out new features dynamically. Upon completing the guide, you will understand how to manage and roll out new features using dynamic feature flag integration.
```

## Prerequisites

> To follow along this guide, you will need the following:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To follow the steps in this guide, you will need the following:
```

- [Node.js 18](https://nodejs.org/en/blog/announcements/v18-release-announce) or later

> - A [Neon](https://console.neon.tech/signup) account – The feature flags will be defined (or mutated) in a Serverless Postgres

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- A [Neon](https://console.neon.tech/signup) account – The feature flags will be defined (or mutated) in a  Postgres database
```

## Steps

> - [Provisioning a Serverless Postgres powered by Neon](#provisioning-a-serverless-postgres-powered-by-neon)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [Provisioning a Postgres database powered by Neon](#provisioning-a-serverless-postgres-powered-by-neon)
```

> - [Create a new SvelteKit application](#create-a-new-sveltekit-application)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [Creating a new SvelteKit application](#create-a-new-sveltekit-application)
```

> - [(Optional) Add Tailwind CSS to the application](#optional-add-tailwind-css-to-the-application)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [(Optional) Adding Tailwind CSS to the application](#optional-add-tailwind-css-to-the-application)
```

- [Managing Feature Flags in Serverless Postgres](#managing-feature-flags-in-serverless-postgres)
- [Dynamic Feature Flag Integration for Testing Fast Payment Methods](#dynamic-feature-flag-integration-for-testing-fast-payment-methods)

> ## Provisioning a Serverless Postgres powered by Neon

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Provisioning a Postgres database powered by Neon
```

You will then be presented with a dialog that provides a connecting string of your database. Click on **Pooled connection** on the top right of the dialog and the connecting string automatically updates in the box below it.

![](/guides/images/feature-flags-sveltekit/index.png)

All Neon connection strings have the following format:

```bash
postgres://<user>:<password>@<endpoint_hostname>.neon.tech:<port>/<dbname>
```

- `user` is the database user.
- `password` is the database user’s password.
- `endpoint_hostname` is the host with neon.tech as the [TLD](https://www.cloudflare.com/en-gb/learning/dns/top-level-domain/).
- `port` is the Neon port number. The default port number is 5432.
- `dbname` is the name of the database. “neondb” is the default database created with each Neon project.
- `?sslmode=require` an optional query parameter that enforces the [SSL](https://www.cloudflare.com/en-gb/learning/ssl/what-is-ssl/) mode while connecting to the Postgres instance for better security.

Save this connecting string somewhere safe to be used as the `DATABASE_URL` further in the guide. Proceed further in this guide to create a SvelteKit application.

> ## Create a new SvelteKit application

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Creating a new SvelteKit application
```

To start building the application, create a new SvelteKit project. Open your terminal and run the following command:

```bash
npm create svelte@latest my-app
```

When prompted, choose:

- `Skeleton project` for **Which Svelte app template?**
- `Yes, using Typescript syntax` for **Add type checking with Typescript?**

Press **Enter** to proceed. Now, follow the instructions to install the dependencies and start the development server:

```bash
npm run dev
```

The app now should be running on [localhost:5173](http://localhost:5173).

> Note: According to an [advanced SvelteKit guide](https://kit.svelte.dev/docs/server-only-modules), using `.server` in the filename allows you to mark the code to be executed on server only.

> Next, run the command below to install the necessary libraries and packages for building the application:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Next, run the commands below to install the necessary libraries and packages for building the application:
```

<CodeTabs labels={["Neon serverless driver", "node-postgres"]}>

```bash
npm install @neondatabase/serverless
npm install -D dotenv tsx
```

```bash
npm install pg
npm install -D dotenv tsx @types/pg
```

</CodeTabs>

> It installs the packages passed to the install command, with the -D flag specifying the libraries intended for development purposes only.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The commands install the required libraries and packages, with the `-D` flag specifying the libraries intended for development purposes only.
```

The libraries installed include:

<CodeTabs labels={["Neon serverless driver", "node-postgres"]}>

```markdown

> - `@neondatabase/serverless`: Neon's PostgreSQL driver for JavaScript and TypeScript.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `@neondatabase/serverless`: Neon's serverless Postgres driver for JavaScript and TypeScript.
```

```

```markdown

> - `pg`: A PostgreSQL client for Node.js.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `pg`: A Postgres client for Node.js.
```

```

</CodeTabs>

The development-specific libraries include:

<CodeTabs labels={["Neon serverless driver", "node-postgres"]}>

```markdown

> - `tsx`: To execute and rebuild TypeScript efficiently.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `tsx`: A library for executing and rebuilding TypeScript efficiently.
```

- `dotenv`: A library for handling environment variables.
```

```markdown
- `@types/pg`: Type definitions for pg.

> - `tsx`: To execute and rebuild TypeScript efficiently.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `tsx`: A library for executing and rebuilding TypeScript efficiently.
```

- `dotenv`: A library for handling environment variables.
```

</CodeTabs>

> ## (Optional) Add Tailwind CSS to the application

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## (Optional) Adding Tailwind CSS to the application
```

> For styling the app, we will be using Tailwind CSS. Install and set up Tailwind at the root of our project's directory by running:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For styling the app, we will use Tailwind CSS. Install and set up Tailwind at the root of our project's directory by running:
```

```bash
npm install -D tailwindcss postcss autoprefixer
npx tailwindcss init -p
```

> Create an `app.css` file in the `src` directory, and add the snippet below in it:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Create an `app.css` file in the `src` directory, and add the snippet below:
```

```css
@tailwind base;
@tailwind components;
@tailwind utilities;
```

Next, add the paths to all of your template files in your `tailwind.config.js` file:

```js
/** @type {import('tailwindcss').Config} */
export default {
  content: [], // [!code --]
  content: ['./src/**/*.{html,js,svelte,ts}'], // [!code ++]
  theme: {
    extend: {}
  },
  plugins: []
};
```

Finally, add an import to `app.css` in your `+page.svelte` file:

```svelte
<script lang="ts"> // [!code ++]
  import '../app.css' // [!code ++]
</script> // [!code ++]

<!-- +page.svelte's HTML -->
```

## Managing Feature Flags in Serverless Postgres

Feature flags offer a powerful way to control the behavior of your application without deploying new code. In a Serverless Postgres environment, you can easily create, read, and update feature flags using the following steps:

> ### Create a Serverless Postgres Client

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Create a serverless Postgres client
```

To create a client that interacts with your serverless postgres, create a `postgres.server.ts` file inside the `src/lib` directory with the following content:

<CodeTabs labels={["Neon serverless driver", "node-postgres"]}>

```tsx
// File: src/lib/postgres.server.ts

// Load Environment Variables
import 'dotenv/config'

// Load the postgres module
import { neon } from '@neondatabase/serverless'

// Create a connection string to the Neon Postgres instance
const connectionString: string = process.env.DATABASE_URL as string

// Create a in-memory query function
export default neon(connectionString)
```

```tsx
// File: src/lib/postgres.server.ts

// Load Environment Variables
import 'dotenv/config'

// Load the postgres module
import pg from 'pg'

// Create a connection string to the Neon Postgres instance
const connectionString: string = process.env.DATABASE_URL as string

// Create a in-memory pool so that it's cached for multiple calls
export default new pg.Pool({ connectionString })
```

</CodeTabs>

> The code above starts with importing the Postgres client. It further imports the config module by `dotenv` that makes sure that all environment variables are populated in application environment. It then creates a new instance of a PostgreSQL connection pool.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The code above starts with importing the Postgres client. It further imports the config module by `dotenv` that makes sure that all environment variables are populated in application environment. It then creates a new instance of a Postgres connection pool.
```

<CodeTabs labels={["Neon serverless driver", "node-postgres"]}>

```tsx
// File: src/lib/feature_flags/setup.server.ts

import sql from '../postgres.server'

async function populateFeatureFlags() {
  await sql`CREATE TABLE IF NOT EXISTS feature_flags (flagName text PRIMARY KEY, enabled boolean)`
  console.log('✅ Setup database for feature flag')
  await sql`INSERT INTO feature_flags (flagName, enabled) VALUES ('fast_payments', true)`
  console.log('✅ Setup an enabled feature flag to accept fast payment methods.')
}

populateFeatureFlags()
```

```tsx
// File: src/lib/feature_flags/setup.server.ts

import pool from '../postgres.server'

async function populateFeatureFlags() {
  await pool.query('CREATE TABLE IF NOT EXISTS feature_flags (flagName text PRIMARY KEY, enabled boolean)')
  console.log('✅ Setup database for feature flag')
  await pool.query({
    text: 'INSERT INTO feature_flags (flagName, enabled) VALUES ($1, $2)',
    values: ['fast_payments', true],
  })
  console.log('✅ Setup an enabled feature flag to accept fast payment methods.')
}

populateFeatureFlags()
```

</CodeTabs>

> The code snippet above first ensures the existence of a table named `feature_flags` in the PostgreSQL database. Then, it inserts a feature flag named `fast_payments` with the value `true`, indicating that fast payment methods are enabled.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The code snippet above first ensures the existence of a table named `feature_flags` in the Postgres database. Then, it inserts a feature flag named `fast_payments` with the value `true`, indicating that fast payment methods are enabled.
```

> ### READ and UPDATE the Feature Flags

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Read and update the feature flags
```

In the `feature_flags` directory, create a file named `set.server.ts` with the following code which will allow you to update the feature flag value in the database.

<CodeTabs labels={["Neon serverless driver", "node-postgres"]}>

```tsx
// File: src/lib/feature_flags/set.server.ts

import sql from '../postgres.server'

export const setEnabled = async (flagName: string, flagValue: boolean) => {
  await sql`UPDATE feature_flags SET enabled = ${flagValue} WHERE flagName = ${flagName}`
}
```

```tsx
// File: src/lib/feature_flags/set.server.ts

import pool from '../postgres.server'

export const setEnabled = async (flagName: string, flagValue: boolean) => {
  await pool.query({
    text: 'UPDATE feature_flags SET enabled = $2 WHERE flagName = $1',
    values: [flagName, flagValue],
  })
}
```

</CodeTabs>

The `setEnabled` function updates the value of a feature flag in the database. In this example, you will update the `fast_payments` feature dynamically per request to get a taste of how feature flags are used in production.

Great! You can use these helper functions in your application to manage and control feature flags dynamically.

> ## Dynamic Feature Flag Integration for Testing Fast Payment Methods

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Dynamic feature flag integration for testing fast payment methods
```

> In this section, you will get an example of how feature flag helps test and roll out new features, dynamically. For example, you are a payment processing company. You have just added a payment method named `PayGM` that helps users pay faster. But you want to test it out on a random basis for each cart that you process. Let's walk through a hypothetical code that allows you to understand the usage of feature flag in this case.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this section, you will get an example of how a feature flag helps test and roll out new features, dynamically. For example, you are a payment processing company. You have just added a payment method named `PayGM` that helps users pay faster. But you want to test it out on a random basis for each cart that you process. Let's walk through the hypothetical code to understand the usage of a feature flag in this case.
```

### Computing the user destination

> In a SvelteKit route, the data from the server to the user interface is passed via `+page.server.ts` file to `+page.svelte`. For the sake of an example, you will load the feature flag dynamically and check if it's enabled to determine the user's destination experience. To do that, add the following snippet to `+page.server.ts` file:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In a SvelteKit route, the data from the server to the user interface is passed via `+page.server.ts` file to `+page.svelte`. For the sake of this example, you will load the feature flag dynamically and check if it's enabled to determine the user's destination experience. To do that, add the following snippet to `+page.server.ts` file:
```

```tsx
// File: src/routes/+page.server.ts

import { isEnabled } from '$lib/feature_flags/get.server'

/** @type {import('./$types').LayoutServerLoad} */
export async function load({ cookies }) {
  const bucket = cookies.get('destination_bucket')
  if (!bucket) {
    const tmp = await isEnabled('fast_payments')
    // If the feature is enabled, try bucketing users randomly
    if (tmp) cookies.set('destination_bucket', Math.random() > 0.5 ? '1' : '0', { path: '/' })
    // If the feature is disabled, do not bucket and preserve the current experience
    else cookies.set('destination_bucket', '0', { path: '/' })
  }
  const fast_payments = Boolean(Number(cookies.get('destination_bucket')))
  return {
    fast_payments,
  }
}
```

> The code above first looks for the bucket assigned to the user. If no such bucket is found, it looks for the value of the feature flag in the database, randomly assigns a boolean whenever the `/` route is visited and sets it into the cookie. Finally, it reads the cookie as the source to determine the user experience, in here to check if the fast payment methods are enabled or not.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The code above first looks for the bucket assigned to the user. If no such bucket is found, it looks for the value of the feature flag in the database, randomly assigns a boolean whenever the `/` route is visited, and sets the value in the cookie. Finally, it reads the cookie as the source to determine the user experience and check if the fast payment methods are enabled or not.
```

> ### Creating a Conditional User Experience

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Creating a conditional user experience
```
